Landsat
Although many of the weather satellite systems
(such as those described in the previous section)
are also used for monitoring the Earth's surface,
they are not optimized for detailed mapping of the
land surface. Driven by the exciting views from, and
great success of the early meteorological satellites
in the 1960's, as well as from images taken during
manned spacecraft missions, the first satellite
designed specifically to monitor the Earth's surface,
Landsat-1, was launched by NASA in 1972. Initially
referred to as ERTS-1, (Earth Resources
Technology Satellite), Landsat was designed as an
experiment to test the feasibility of collecting multi-spectral Earth observation data
from an unmanned satellite platform. Since that time, this highly successful program
has collected an abundance of data from around the world from several Landsat
satellites. Originally managed by NASA, responsibility for the Landsat program was
transferred to NOAA in 1983. In 1985, the program became commercialized,
providing data to civilian and applications users.
Landsat's success is due to several factors, including: a combination of sensors with spectral
bands tailored to Earth observation; functional spatial resolution; and good areal coverage
(swath width and revisit period). The long lifespan of the program has provided a voluminous
archive of Earth resource data facilitating long term monitoring and historical records and
research. All Landsat satellites are placed in near-polar, sun-synchronous orbits. The first
three satellites (Landsats 1-3) are at altitudes around 900 km and have revisit periods of 18
days while the later satellites are at around 700 km and have revisit periods of 16 days. All
Landsat satellites have equator crossing times in the morning to optimize illumination
conditions.
A number of sensors have been on board the Landsat series of satellites, including the
Return Beam Vidicon (RBV) camera systems, the MultiSpectral Scanner (MSS) systems,
and the Thematic Mapper (TM). The most popular instrument in the early days of Landsat
was the MultiSpectral Scanner (MSS) and later the Thematic Mapper (TM). Each of these
sensors collected data over a swath width of 185 km, with a full scene being defined as 185
km x 185 km.
The MSS senses the electromagnetic radiation from the Earth's surface in four spectral
bands. Each band has a spatial resolution of approximately 60 x 80 metres and a radiometric
resolution of 6 bits, or 64 digital numbers. Sensing is accomplished with a line scanning
device using an oscillating mirror. Six scan lines are collected simultaneously with each westto-
east sweep of the scanning mirror. The accompanying table outlines the spectral
wavelength ranges for the MSS.Routine collection of MSS data ceased in 1992, as the use of TM data, starting on Landsat 4,
superseded the MSS. The TM sensor provides several improvements over the MSS sensor
including: higher spatial and radiometric resolution; finer spectral bands; seven as opposed to
four spectral bands; and an increase in the number of detectors per band (16 for the nonthermal
channels versus six for MSS). Sixteen scan lines are captured simultaneously for
each non-thermal spectral band (four for thermal band), using an oscillating mirror which
scans during both the forward (west-to-east) and reverse (east-to-west) sweeps of the
scanning mirror. This difference from the MSS increases the dwell time (see section 2.8) and
improves the geometric and radiometric integrity of the data. Spatial resolution of TM is 30 m
for all but the thermal infrared band which is 120 m. All channels are recorded over a range of
256 digital numbers (8 bits). The accompanying table outlines the spectral resolution of the
individual TM bands and some useful applications of each.Data from both the TM and MSS sensors are used
for a wide variety of applications, including resource
management, mapping, environmental monitoring,
and change detection (e.g. monitoring forest
clearcutting). The archives of Canadian imagery
include over 350,000 scenes of MSS and over
200,000 scenes of TM, managed by the licensed
distributor in Canada: RSI Inc. Many more scenes
are held by foreign facilities around the world.
