Many electronic (as opposed to photographic) remote sensors acquire data using scanning
systems, which employ a sensor with a narrow field of view (i.e. IFOV) that sweeps over the
terrain to build up and produce a two-dimensional image of the surface. Scanning systems
can be used on both aircraft and satellite platforms and have essentially the same operating
principles. A scanning system used to collect data over a variety of different wavelength
ranges is called a multispectral scanner (MSS), and is the most commonly used scanning
system. There are two main modes or methods of scanning employed to acquire multispectral
image data - across-track scanning, and along-track scanning.
Across-track scanners scan the Earth in a
series of lines. The lines are oriented
perpendicular to the direction of motion of the
sensor platform (i.e. across the swath). Each line
is scanned from one side of the sensor to the
other, using a rotating mirror (A). As the
platform moves forward over the Earth,
successive scans build up a two-dimensional
image of the Earth´s surface. The incoming
reflected or emitted radiation is separated into
several spectral components that are detected
independently. The UV, visible, near-infrared,
and thermal radiation are dispersed into their
constituent wavelengths. A bank of internal detectors (B), each sensitive to a specific range
of wavelengths, detects and measures the energy for each spectral band and then, as an
electrical signal, they are converted to digital data and recorded for subsequent computer
processing.
The IFOV (C) of the sensor and the altitude of the platform determine the ground resolution
cell viewed (D), and thus the spatial resolution. The angular field of view (E) is the sweep of
the mirror, measured in degrees, used to record a scan line, and determines the width of the
imaged swath (F). Airborne scanners typically sweep large angles (between 90º and 120º),
while satellites, because of their higher altitude need only to sweep fairly small angles (10-
20º) to cover a broad region. Because the distance from the sensor to the target increases
towards the edges of the swath, the ground resolution cells also become larger and introduce
geometric distortions to the images. Also, the length of time the IFOV "sees" a ground
resolution cell as the rotating mirror scans (called the dwell time), is generally quite short and
influences the design of the spatial, spectral, and radiometric resolution of the sensor.Along-track scanners also use the forward motion
of the platform to record successive scan lines and
build up a two-dimensional image, perpendicular to
the flight direction. However, instead of a scanning
mirror, they use a linear array of detectors (A)
located at the focal plane of the image (B) formed
by lens systems (C), which are "pushed" along in
the flight track direction (i.e. along track). These
systems are also referred to as pushbroom
scanners, as the motion of the detector array is
analogous to the bristles of a broom being pushed
along a floor. Each individual detector measures the
energy for a single ground resolution cell (D) and
thus the size and IFOV of the detectors determines
the spatial resolution of the system. A separate linear array is required to measure each
spectral band or channel. For each scan line, the energy detected by each detector of each
linear array is sampled electronically and digitally recorded.
Along-track scanners with linear arrays have several advantages over across-track mirror
scanners. The array of detectors combined with the pushbroom motion allows each detector
to "see" and measure the energy from each ground resolution cell for a longer period of time
(dwell time). This allows more energy to be detected and improves the radiometric resolution.
The increased dwell time also facilitates smaller IFOVs and narrower bandwidths for each
detector. Thus, finer spatial and spectral resolution can be achieved without impacting
radiometric resolution. Because detectors are usually solid-state microelectronic devices, they
are generally smaller, lighter, require less power, and are more reliable and last longer
because they have no moving parts. On the other hand, cross-calibrating thousands of
detectors to achieve uniform sensitivity across the array is necessary and complicated.
Regardless of whether the scanning system used is either of these two types, it has several
advantages over photographic systems. The spectral range of photographic systems is
restricted to the visible and near-infrared regions while MSS systems can extend this range
into the thermal infrared. They are also capable of much higher spectral resolution than
photographic systems. Multi-band or multispectral photographic systems use separate lens
systems to acquire each spectral band. This may cause problems in ensuring that the
different bands are comparable both spatially and radiometrically and with registration of the
multiple images. MSS systems acquire all spectral bands simultaneously through the same
optical system to alleviate these problems. Photographic systems record the energy detected
by means of a photochemical process which is difficult to measure and to make consistent.
Because MSS data are recorded electronically, it is easier to determine the specific amount of
energy measured, and they can record over a greater range of values in a digital format.
Photographic systems require a continuous supply of film and processing on the ground after
the photos have been taken. The digital recording in MSS systems facilitates transmission ofdata to receiving stations on the ground and immediate processing of data in a computer
environment.
