For some remote sensing instruments, the distance between the target being imaged and the
platform, plays a large role in determining the detail of information obtained and the total area
imaged by the sensor. Sensors onboard platforms far away from their targets, typically view a
larger area, but cannot provide great detail. Compare what an astronaut onboard the space
shuttle sees of the Earth to what you can see from an airplane. The astronaut might see your
whole province or country in one glance, but couldn't distinguish individual houses. Flying over
a city or town, you would be able to see individual buildings and cars, but you would be
viewing a much smaller area than the astronaut. There is a similar difference between satellite
images and airphotos.
The detail discernible in an image is dependent on the
spatial resolution of the sensor and refers to the size of
the smallest possible feature that can be detected.
Spatial resolution of passive sensors (we will look at the
special case of active microwave sensors later) depends
primarily on their Instantaneous Field of View (IFOV).
The IFOV is the angular cone of visibility of the sensor (A)
and determines the area on the Earth's surface which is
"seen" from a given altitude at one particular moment in
time (B). The size of the area viewed is determined by
multiplying the IFOV by the distance from the ground to
the sensor (C). This area on the ground is called the
resolution cell and determines a sensor's maximum
spatial resolution. For a homogeneous feature to be
detected, its size generally has to be equal to or larger than the resolution cell. If the feature is
smaller than this, it may not be detectable as the average brightness of all features in that
resolution cell will be recorded. However, smaller features may sometimes be detectable if
their reflectance dominates within a articular resolution cell allowing sub-pixel or resolution cell
detection.
As we mentioned in Chapter 1, most remote sensing images are composed of a matrix of
picture elements, or pixels, which are the smallest units of an image. Image pixels are
normally square and represent a certain area on an image. It is important to distinguish
between pixel size and spatial resolution - they are not interchangeable. If a sensor has a
spatial resolution of 20 metres and an image from that sensor is displayed at full resolution,
each pixel represents an area of 20m x 20m on the ground. In this case the pixel size and
resolution are the same. However, it is possible to display an image with a pixel size different
than the resolution. Many posters of satellite images of the Earth have their pixels averaged to
represent larger areas, although the original spatial resolution of the sensor that collected the
imagery remains the same. Images where only large features are visible are said to have coarse or low resolution. In
fine or high resolution images, small objects can be detected. Military sensors for example,
are designed to view as much detail as possible, and therefore have very fine resolution.
Commercial satellites provide imagery with resolutions varying from a few metres to several
kilometres. Generally speaking, the finer the resolution, the less total ground area can be
seen.
The ratio of distance on an image or map, to actual ground distance is referred to as scale. If
you had a map with a scale of 1:100,000, an object of 1cm length on the map would actually
be an object 100,000cm (1km) long on the ground. Maps or images with small "map-to-ground
ratios" are referred to as small scale (e.g. 1:100,000), and those with larger ratios (e.g.
1:5,000) are called large scale.