Cameras and their use for aerial photography are the simplest and
oldest of sensors used for remote sensing of the Earth's surface.
Cameras are framing systems which acquire a near-instantaneous
"snapshot" of an area (A), of the surface. Camera systems are
passive optical sensors that use a lens (B) (or system of lenses
collectively referred to as the optics) to form an image at the focal
plane (C), the plane at which an image is sharply defined.
Photographic films are sensitive to light from 0.3 μm to 0.9 μm in
wavelength covering the ultraviolet (UV), visible, and near-infrared
(NIR). Panchromatic films are sensitive to the UV and the visible
portions of the spectrum. Panchromatic film produces black and white
images and is the most common type of film used for aerial
photography. UV photography also uses panchromatic film, but a filter is used with the
camera to absorb and block the visible energy from reaching the film. As a result, only the UV
reflectance from targets is recorded. UV photography is not widely used, because of the
atmospheric scattering and absorption that occurs in this region of the spectrum. Black and
white infrared photography uses film sensitive to the entire 0.3 to 0.9 μm wavelength range
and is useful for detecting differences in vegetation cover, due to its sensitivity to IR
reflectance.
Colour and false colour (or colour infrared, CIR) photography involves the use of a three layer
film with each layer sensitive to different ranges of light. For a normal colour photograph,
the layers are sensitive to blue, green, and red light - the same as our eyes. These photos
appear to us the same way that our eyes see the environment, as the colours resemble those
which would appear to us as "normal" (i.e. trees appear green, etc.). In colour infrared (CIR)
photography, the three emulsion layers are sensitive to green, red, and the photographic
portion of near-infrared radiation, which are processed to appear as blue, green, and red,respectively. In a false colour photograph, targets with high near-infrared reflectance appear
red, those with a high red reflectance appear green, and those with a high green reflectance
appear blue, thus giving us a "false" presentation of the targets relative to the colour we
normally perceive them to be.
Cameras can be used on a variety of platforms including ground-based stages, helicopters,
aircraft, and spacecraft. Very detailed photographs taken from aircraft are useful for many
applications where identification of detail or small targets is required. The ground coverage of
a photo depends on several factors, including the focal length of the lens, the platform
altitude, and the format and size of the film. The focal length effectively controls the angular
field of view of the lens (similar to the concept of instantaneous field of view discussed in
section 2.3) and determines the area "seen" by the camera. Typical focal lengths used are
90mm, 210mm, and most commonly, 152mm. The longer the focal length, the smaller the
area covered on the ground, but with greater detail (i.e. larger scale). The area covered also
depends on the altitude of the platform. At high altitudes, a camera will "see" a larger area on
the ground than at lower altitudes, but with reduced detail (i.e. smaller scale). Aerial photos
can provide fine detail down to spatial resolutions of less than 50 cm. A photo's exact spatial
resolution varies as a complex function of many factors which vary with each acquisition of
data.
Most aerial photographs are classified as either
oblique or vertical, depending on the
orientation of the camera relative to the ground
during acquisition. Oblique aerial
photographs are taken with the camera
pointed to the side of the aircraft. High oblique
photographs usually include the horizon while
low oblique photographs do not. Oblique
photographs can be useful for covering very
large areas in a single image and for depicting
terrain relief and scale. However, they are not widely used for mapping as distortions in scale
from the foreground to the background preclude easy measurements of distance, area, and
elevation.
Vertical photographs taken with a single-lens frame camera is the most common use of
aerial photography for remote sensing and mapping purposes. These cameras are specifically
built for capturing a rapid sequence of photographs while limiting geometric distortion. They
are often linked with navigation systems onboard the aircraft platform, to allow for accurate
geographic coordinates to be instantly assigned to each photograph. Most camera systems
also include mechanisms which compensate for the effect of the aircraft motion relative to the
ground, in order to limit distortion as much as possible.
